# Chandrayaan programme
The Chandrayaan programme also known as the Indian Lunar Exploration Programme is an ongoing series of outer space missions by the Indian Space Research Organization (ISRO) for the exploration of the Moon. The program incorporates a lunar orbiter, an impactor, a soft lander and a rover spacecraft. 

There have been three missions so far with a total of two orbiters, landers and rovers each. While the two orbiters were successful, the first lander and rover which were part of the Chandrayaan-2 mission, crashed on the surface. The second lander and rover mission Chandrayaan-3 successfully landed on the Moon on 23 August 2023, making India the first nation to successfully land a spacecraft in the lunar south pole region, and the fourth country to soft land on the Moon after the Soviet Union, the United States and China.

## Background
The Indian space programme had begun with no intentions of undertaking sophisticated initiatives like human spaceflight and extraterrestrial missions during the initial days. It was only after ISRO developed the capabilities of creating satellites and orbital launch vehicles like PSLV, that the possibilities of India's first extraterrestrial exploration mission to the Moon were being explored in the early 2000s. The idea of a lunar scientific mission was first raised in 1999 during a meeting of the Indian Academy of Sciences (IAS) which was then carried forward by the Astronautical Society of India (ASI) in 2000.The robotic exploration programme is intended as a precursor until Indian astronauts land on the Moon to carry forward further explorations, with the robotic programme planned to continue beyond crewed landings.

## History
### First mission
Soon after the proposals by the Indian Academy of Sciences in 1999 and by the Astronautical Society of India in 2000, a National Lunar Mission Task Force (NLMTF) was set up which constituted ISRO and leading Indian scientists and technologists across the nation to conduct the feasibility study. The study report was then reviewed by a peer group of 100 scientists from various fields.
The Indian Moon Mission assumes significance in the context of the international scientific community considering several exciting missions in planetary exploration, in the new millennium.ISRO has the necessary expertise to develop and launch the Moon Mission with imaginative features and it would be different from the past missions. Hence ISRO should go ahead with the project approval and implementation. Apart from technological and scientific gains, it would provide the needed thrust to basic science and engineering research in the country. The project would help return young talents to the arena of fundamental research.
The Academia, in particular, the university scientists would find participation in such a project intellectually rewarding. In this context, the scientific objectives would need further refinement to include other innovative ideas from a broader scientific community through Announcement of Opportunity, etc.

The project required India set up its deep space network and the entire project cost ₹360 crore (US$45 million).On 22 October 2008, Chandrayaan-1 was successfully launched aboard the PSLV rocket. After earth bound maneuvers and trans lunar injection, Chandrayaan-1 entered the lunar orbit on 10 November, making India the fifth nation to orbit Moon. Four days later, on 14 November, the Moon Impact Probe (MIP) impacted near the Shackleton crater, in the lunar south pole, this made India the fifth country to reach the lunar surface and the first to reach lunar south pole.The MIP made the most significant discovery by confirming the existence of water on Moon. This discovery was not made public until NASA's Moon Mineralogy Mapper payload onboard Chandrayaan-1 orbiter confirmed the same on 24 September 2009.The mission was intended to last two years, but the contact with the orbiter was lost on 28 August 2009, which officially ended the mission.

### Second mission 
After the success of the Chandrayaan-1 mission, a follow-up mission worth ₹425 crore (US$53 million) was already being planned and was targeted for a launch in 2012. Abdul Kalam suggested for collaboration between India and the United States for the Chandrayaan-2 mission, which would soft land near the lunar south pole and perform robotic penetrations into the surface to study more about the lunar water. However, an agreement had already been signed in the year 2007 by ISRO and Roscosmos, the Russian federal space agency, for the second lunar mission under the Chandrayaan-2 project.
According to the agreement, ISRO had the responsibility of launching, orbiting, and deployment of the rover while Russia's Roscosmos would provide the lander. The design of the spacecraft by ISRO was completed in 2009, the payloads were also finalized and the launch was targeted for 2013. The project then hit a roadblock when Russia delayed its development of the lander due to failure of its Fobos-Grunt mission which revealed technical issues in the similar parts that would be used in the lunar lander. ussia then proposed a few changes which required ISRO to decrease mass of its rover due to increase in the mass of the lander. A delayed timeline and the Russian request to accept the risk meant that India had to undertake the entire project independently.

### Successful soft landing
Two months after the failure of Chandrayaan-2, the third mission was proposed with the lander and rover being the primary components of the mission, unlike previously where the orbiter carried a greater scientific payload. The Chandrayaan-3 would be a re-attempt to demonstrate the landing capabilities needed for the LUPEX mission, a proposed partnership with Japan that was planned for 2025-26 time frame. ISRO sought ₹75 crore (US$9.4 million) from the government as initial funding for the Chandrayaan-3 project that included a propulsion module, a lander, and a rover. It was expected to launch a year later in November 2020. he work on the project was underway come January 2020 and K. Sivan revealed that the launch may happen in early 2021 with the total cost of the project being ₹615 crore (US$77 million). The earlier addition of the fifth engine in the Chandrayaan-2's lander that caused the additional thrust was now removed from the design of Chandrayaan-3. Like Chandrayaan-2, the testing for the lander was to be conducted in Challakere where ISRO's previously built Moon like site with craters had deteriorated. A total of ₹24.2 lakh (US$30,000) was spent on recreating the site with craters of similar dimensions (10 m (33 ft) wide and 3 m (9.8 ft) deep). 

The launch which was planned for early 2021, was then delayed to 2022 due to COVID-19 pandemic in India. The propulsion module which was ready before the pandemic had begun its testing, following which the lander and rover tests were to be conducted but the pandemic delayed the project and pushed its tentative launch date to the third quarter of 2022. ew more changes with strengthening the landing legs, improvisation in instruments, a failure-proof configuration and additional testing meant that the new schedule for the launch was moved to second quarter of 2023. In May 2023, the spacecraft was in its final stage of the assembly of payloads at the U R Rao Satellite Centre with the launch targeted for the first or second week of July. On 14 July 2023, Chandrayaan-3 was successfully launched on LVM3 and was inserted in the lunar sphere of gravitational influence on 5 August 2023. On 23 August 2023, the lander Vikram successfully soft landed in the lunar south pole region, achieving humanity's first soft landing in the region and making India the fourth country to soft land on the Moon after Soviet Union, United States and China. Soon after the touchdown, the rover Pragyan got down of the ramp and drove 8 m (26 ft) making India only the third country to operate a robotic rover on the Moon after Soviet Union and China. 

## Spacecrafts
The Chandrayaan programme consists of robotic explorers such as the Moon Impact Probe (MIP) an impactor, Chandrayaan-1 and 2 the orbiters, Vikram lander and Pragyaan rover. 

### Impactor: Moon Impact Probe
The Moon Impact Probe (MIP) weighed 35 kg (77 lb) with 25 minutes of expected operating duration. It carried a Radar altimeter to record the altitude data which would be used in qualifying technologies for future soft landing missions, a Video imaging system to acquire close-range pictures of the lunar surface, and a Mass spectrometer to study the tenuous atmosphere of the Moon. On 12 November 2008, the MIP separated from the orbiter and impacted near the lunar south pole's Shackleton crater.While descending, the probe's Chandra's Altitudinal Composition Explorer (CHACE) instrument detected the presence of water.

## Orbiters
### Chandrayaan-1
Chandrayaan-1 launched on 22 October 2008 aboard PSLV-XL was a solar-powered cuboid orbiter that weighed 1,380 kg (3,042 lb) along with the Moon Impact Probe. It was powered by a single-sided solar array during the day and was supported by lithium-ion batteries during night time. The attitude of the spacecraft was controlled by three-axis stabilization method using two star sensors, gyroscopes and four reaction wheels. The scientific data transmission was conducted in X band frequencies while telemetry tracking was done in S band frequencies. To store these data, two solid-state recorders (SSR) were used with SSR-1 carrying 32 GB dedicated capacity for scientific data while SSR-2 carrying 8 GB capacity for the rest of the scientific data and attitude information. Moon Mineralogy Mapper, an American scientific payload onboard carried its own SSR with 10 GB capacity.
The orbiter-impactor composite entered the lunar sphere of gravitational influence on 8 November 2008 and after orbital reduction maneuvers, it attained an elliptical polar orbit of 100 km (62 mi), upon which, two of the eleven scientific payloads, the Terrain Mapping Camera (TMC) which had a spatial resolution of 5 m (16 ft)  and Radiation Dose Monitor (RADOM) were switched on for operations. Post deployment of MIP, rest of the nine scientific instruments began operations. On 25 November 2008, just a couple of weeks after entering lunar orbit, the orbiter's temperature rose to 50 °C (122 °F) after receiving equal amounts of heat from the sun as well as the moon (due to its Albedo). Efforts such as rotating the craft by 20 degrees, shutting down the mission computers, and increasing its orbit to 200 km (120 mi) were made to bring its temperature down and to avoid damaging the onboard instruments.  year later, the overheating problem was responsible for ending the mission as it damaged the star sensors which maintained the orientation of craft. The orientation was then barely maintained with the help of gyroscopes as a temporary measure before losing contact on 28 August 2009, which ended the mission a year before its intended duration. However, the mission was analyzed to be 95% successful with its intended operations. 

### Chandrayaan-2
Chandrayaan-2 was the second mission under the programme and it included an orbiter, lander, and rover. After the failure of the Chandrayaan-1 orbiter, the Chandrayaan-2 orbiter enabled ISRO to conduct science with modern cameras and instruments. The primary objectives of this mission were to soft land on the surface and operate a rover, to study the lunar surface, its exosphere, minerals and water ice. While the Chandrayaan-2 composite (orbiter, lander and rover) weighed 3,850 kg (8,490 lb) in total, the orbiter alone weighed 2,379 kg (5,245 lb). It carried eight scientific instruments with two of the instruments; the Terrain Mapping Camera 2 (TMC-2) and Chandrayaan-2 Atmospheric Compositional Explorer 2 (ChACE-2) being upgraded versions of Terrain Mapping camera (TMC) and Chandra's Atmospheric Compositional Explorer (CHACE) onboard Chandrayaan-1 orbiter and Moon Impact Probe respectively. The Orbiter High-Resolution Camera (OHRC) during the time remained the most advanced camera in the lunar orbit with a spatial resolution of 25 cm (9.8 in), four times higher than Chandrayaan-1 orbiter's 1 m (3 ft 3 in) resolution. The orbiter is currently studying the lava tubes and caves which were previously spotted by the Chandrayaan-1 orbiter.

### Chandrayaan-3
With the Chandrayaan-2 orbiter already operational and the need of demonstrating landing capabilities, Chandraayn-3's orbiter carried only a single payload and for its main purpose served as a propulsion module for carrying Vikram to the Moon. The Spectro-polarimetry of Habitable Planet Earth (SHAPE) payload was developed to study Earth's atmosphere from distance and it would aid in the study of Exoplanets' atmospheres, which employs a similar technique. The orbiter also known as Propulsion Module (PM) of Chandrayaan-3, was moved from its orbit around Moon to an orbit around Earth. While the initial plan was to operate SHAPE for about three months during the mission life of orbiter, the precise lower earth orbit injection by LVM3 and optimal earth / lunar burn maneuvers, resulted in the availability of over 100 kg (220 lb) of fuel in the orbiter after over one month of operations in the lunar orbit. It was decided to use the available fuel in it to derive additional information for future lunar missions and demonstrate the mission operation strategies for a sample return mission. In order to continue SHAPE payload for Earth observation, it was decided to re-orbit the orbiter to a suitable Earth orbit. This mission plan was worked out considering the collision avoidance such as preventing the orbiter from crashing on to the Moon's surface or entering into the Earth's GEO belt at 36000 km and orbits below that. Considering the estimated fuel availability and the safety to GEO spacecraft, the optimal Earth return trajectory was designed for October 2023.

## Landers
### Vikram (Chandrayaan-2)
The lander was named Vikram and it weighed 1,471 kg (3,243 lb) including the 27 kg (60 lb) rover named Pragyan that it housed inside. t carried four payloads to study lunar seismic activity, measure the lunar sub-surface temperatures and to measure density and variation of lunar surface plasma (using a langmuir probe). After two de-orbiting manoeuvers, Vikram attained a final orbit of 95 km × 119 km (59 mi × 74 mi) after which the powered descent phase began on 7 September 2019. During the descent and landing, the onboard computers had complete control over the lander. Upon analysis, it was found that the main engines had higher thrust than normal which led to errors being accumulated over time and this meant the lander could not change its attitude at such a fast pace due to safety constraints in the onboard computer that had a limit on the maximum rate with which it can change its attitude. Coarse throttling of main engines, error in computing the remaining time in the mission and a small landing site of 500 x 500 m were the other reasons attributed to the failure.

### Vikram (Chandrayaan-3)
handrayaan-3's Vikram lander had underwent major changes after its predecessor crash landed. here were now four instead of five main engines that provided 800 N (180 lbf) of thrust and had slew rate changing capabilities, unlike previously when the centrally mounted fifth engine lacked the capability. This enabled the lander to control the attitude and thrust during all phases of descent. The attitude correction rate was also increased from Chandrayaan-2's 10°/s to 25°/s with Chandrayaan-3. An additional laser Doppler velocimeter (LDV) was equipped that allowed attitude measurements in all three directions. he impact legs were made larger and stronger relative to Chandrayaan-2. The OHRC onboard Chandrayaan-2 enabled the mission to have an expanded landing site with 10 km2 (3.9 sq mi) landing area. The lander underwent several tests including a helicopter drop test that helped in improving the structural rigidity. In the event of a failure during descent and landing, multiple contingency systems were added to improve the survivability chances of the lander. On 3 September 2023, before putting Vikram to sleep mode, ISRO conducted a hop on the lunar surface by firing its engines that moved it 40 cm (16 in) vertically as well as laterally before touching down again. The hop experiment proved to be the most significant test conducted by ISRO as the data would aid in future sample return missions under the programme. ISRO also attained a unique record of conducting its first vertical take-off and landing on an extraterrestrial surface before Earth; that was planned to be conducted under its Reusable technology demonstration programme.

## Rovers
### Pragyan (Chandrayaan-2)
The Rover named Pragyan carried two scientific payloads that were to be used in determining the elemental composition and its abundance near the landing site.It was designed to travel at a speed of 1 cm/s (0.39 in/s) and could drive up to 500 m (1,600 ft) in its lifetime. Both the lander and rover were expected to operate for one lunar day as they lacked any Radioisotope heater unit (RHU) and were entirely dependent on solar power for operations.The Chandrayaan-2's Pragyaan was precluded from its operations after the crash landing of its carrier Vikram. 

### Pragyan (Chandrayaan-3)
Unlike the lander, there were no changes made in the Pragyan rover except for switching ISRO's logo with Emblem of India on the left and right wheels respectively that would imprint them on the regolith. The scientific objectives too remained unchanged since the previous mission. On 23 August 2023, a few hours after the soft landing, the ramp was deployed for the Pragyan to touch down and begin its operations on the surface.A few days later, the instruments were turned on and the rover moved 8 m (26 ft) on the surface, thus achieving the primary goal of the mission. On 3 September 2023, with the lunar night approaching, the rover was shut down and put into 'sleep mode'. 
